So the first question is, do you think the
astronauts are heroes? I think that heroes is
something that people make up in their minds.
You'll find that most people that get put in the
image of heroes are just plain people like anybody
else, and they've all got their quirks and their
weaknesses and their strong points. I had heroes
when I was growing up, and they included guys like
Chuck Yeager, who I later learned to know
personally and found out that Chuck, he is quite a
man. He's still a hero of mine, but he's still a
person. I think that astronauts get put in that
position. And consequently, they should be aware
of it because they do have a strong influence on how
kids think of them and pattern their lives. How do
you feel about the media blitzes that you received
as an astronaut? Well, that comes and goes. The
media can be... It can be an enemy. It can be a
friend. Prior to flying the first flight of
Columbia, we had a lot of criticism regarding the
vehicle, were we ever going to get it airborne. And
after the flight, they were all our friends. And I
think as we fly more and more, they will tend to be
more critical than they have been. But they're
going to start being that way. And I think you just
have to learn to deal with the media. Quite often
you learn after having been involved with some
stories that they've done that they can slant
things, maybe not on purpose, but they just don't
know all the facts. So the way it comes out in the
newspaper quite often is not the way it really is.
What kind of pressures has being an astronaut
placed on your family? The main thing, I think, is
that I'm going a lot. But since I'm a Navy man and
have spent months on cruises, I think at least my
wife grew accustomed to that. So I believe they're
more or less comfortable with the thing. I think
perhaps during the flight and some of the
hullabaloo that was associated with that, both
pre and post, perhaps my kids got a little bit more
of that. And they enjoyed it. I think it was kind of
like being in the spotlight. But I believe they've
adapted to it fairly well. How long will it be
before we see women and minorities in space? Well.
I'm a Southpaw. I got to fly that. We're one of the
last minorities left around. I think that we have
eight ladies training to fly right now. Not
training to fly, but in the astronaut office. And
we have three blacks. And we also, correction,
we've got four. We've got four blacks. Hey, Chuck.
Hey, Chuck. How are you? One Hispanic. Yes, sir.
Check, please. oriental origin who mixes quite a
few things. And I think that there's chances of
seeing some of those people fly as early as next
year. Are you going to say the lowest damage to any
hero image that there might be? No, I don't think
so. The First Lady and the First Black that end up
flying, I know, are going to have more hero image
associated with them than most of us have in the
past. I almost feel sorry for them. That's really
going to be a tough load to carry. Are the
astronauts stamped out of the same mold
physically or mentally? Oh, no. We've got, I
believe, 78 people in the astronaut office now,
currently, and quite a few that have gone on to
retire. And you'll find out you've got just about
as wide a range as individuals as you can find any
place. There's a certain amount of common
goal-oriented kind of philosophy, I believe,
amongst the people. And also you'll find that most
of the people are very hard workers, tend to work
long hours, be somewhat workaholics. So there are
some common threads, I believe, that link most of
us, but there's still an awful lot of
individualism.
What types of changes are being made for the women?
With regard to the spacecraft or how we operate?
Very little. About the only thing is that the...
the waste management facility, the toilet, was
designed to collect urine from either males or
females, and that was a minor modification that
you probably wouldn't even know if I pointed it out
to you. And other than that, size-wise, the
pressure suit that would go outside has had to come
down in a smaller size. That really is about all.
We've found that working in space is a very
relaxing, easy kind of an environment, with the
exception of going outside in the pressure suit.
And so there's not really any strength involved
with it. And some of these ladies that we've got,
for example, are awful smart. They're a lot
smarter than some of the guys we've got around
here. So as far as brains, they've got it all. We
really haven't had to make any modifications for
them, except maybe in our mentalities. Yeah. What
is the criteria for becoming an astronaut? Well,
there's a set standard of things people have to
have filled, you know, degrees. We're looking for
people with degrees in science or engineering.
We've got two categories we selected now, pilot
and mission specialist. Pilot type, of course,
has to have quite a bit of time in high-performance
jet airplanes. The mission specialists are
mainly looking for people with usually PhDs, but
all that's really required to apply is a master's.
You look for people that like to do diverse things,
that are interested in learning all about the way
things operate, that tend to be operational in
nature rather than all people that want to go do
experiments. We have a lot of people with
scientific backgrounds, You're really the kind
of person we need. It's not somebody that wants to
go down and do detailed science, but somebody that
likes to study the overall thing. Are
the astronauts fairly socially close-knit? Not
really. I think the initial astronauts that came
down, smaller groups and so forth, tended to be a
little bit closer-knit group than what we've got
now. We have small groups that are friends and tend
to socialize, but not as a big unit. We have
periodic parties. Most of them are associated
with celebrating after a flight. We'll probably
have one just a little... Jack and Gordo that just
got down from STS-3 will pull off here in the next
week or so. But we really don't tend to socialize as
a group all that much. Is there anything like an
Astronaut's Wives Club? Used to be a long time ago,
but most of the wives just weren't interested in
that sort of thing. And some of the wives will still
get together for coffee periodically, but
there's not anything like a wives club. Do you see
the effects of public opinion in that? We see the
effects of public opinion mainly through our
budget. And I guess right now it would appear that
the public is really behind us, at least you can see
that reflected in Congress. Congress is very much
in favor of what we're doing. And I think that's
mainly been the case all along, although When
we're not in the public eye, it is hard for the
public to voice that support. But with the flights
that we've got going with the space shuttle now,
all we're hearing are positive words. You'll hear
a few negative people, but they are not the
majority. Is NASA suffering from the recent
budget cuts? Very little compared to most of the
agencies NASA fared out very well. Now, we did get
some of our unmanned science projects cut back,
unfortunately. We hope those will mainly just be
deferred, and then we'll get to carry them out
eventually. But in the long term, NASA fared very
well in that, and that is because of both Congress
and administration being very pro-space right
now. Is the Defense Department in any way blowing
up now? I think it is primarily due to the Defense
Department's commitment to the space shuttle
that we were able to fare those couple of years that
we had prior to getting the shuttle off. We were
having so much problems with our main engines, our
tiles, our thermal protection system, that if we
had not had the Department of Defense support we
would have had a tough time holding our own. But we
have had it, and I think it's been good for the space
program. There's still been some people
concerned about the shuttle's association with
the military and that the science civilian end
will end up suffering. I don't think that's going
to be the case. The military has always utilized
space just about ever since the first satellite
going up, and they're going to continue to doing
that. The space shuttle is just going to have a way
of getting those satellites up easier and cheaper
than we've been doing with unmanned rockets. And
so I think it's good that we're working with the
military. Now, I'm a little bit biased since I'm a
military person myself. OK, plaque was placed on
the moon. It said, here men came from the planet
Earth, first set foot upon the moon July of 1969 AD.
We came in peace for all of mankind. Are we still in
space for peaceful reasons? Absolutely. The
United States is committed to a space treaty that
says we'll only use space for peaceful purposes,
and I actually think it's been the military use of
space, both in this country and in the Soviet
Union, that has helped us maintain peace over at
least the past decade. The nature of trying to
maintain treaties like SALT without a valid means
of ensuring what the other country is doing is just
not reasonable. And you can use detection means
from space to ensure that all signers of the
treaties are doing what they say they're doing.
And I think that has been one of the big reasons that
we've been able to avoid any open confrontation
with the Soviet Union. And so for that reason, I
really think that we ought to continue to use
space. So you feel this type of space diplomacy
works? Absolutely. It beats anything else
anybody else has come up with. Do you feel that
space will turn into the next location for an arms
building? It is possible. It is possible,
certainly. And I hope that is not the case. But it's
an environment that certainly has to be inviting
for anybody worrying about... the kind of weapons
we now have on the Earth. It's a new environment
that man has tended to utilize each environment it
is found to conduct war with. So it's going to take
some very strong-minded people and countries to
keep that from happening. And I think that is the
intent of the US to try to keep weapons out of space.
It often depends on what the other guy does. So then
you feel that space-based wars are possible?
Certainly possible.
But right now, anything is possible. Right now, it
does not appear that we're necessarily heading in
that direction. So then would you say that they're
inevitable? No, I would not say they're
inevitable. I think we can control it. I'll tell
you. What do you see as our future in space? Well, in
near term, it's fairly easy to see. We're building
a total of four orbiters or space shuttles.
Hopefully, maybe even getting a fifth, and then
maybe even subsequent ones. We'll be flying many
flights each year, upwards, hopefully, of 20 some
odd. By putting those many flights up, then you're
going to see lots more of the same kind of
satellites that we have now, more sophisticated
ones. And hopefully those will be used to enhance
the quality of life we have here on Earth.
Eventually we would like to see us move out and
build a permanent orbiting space station. And
that is the next logical step in our progression of
exploration of space. That is probably going to
take close to 10 years from the time we're given the
go-ahead on it, and we have not been given a
go-ahead, although we're pursuing that pretty
heavily at NASA. So I think that's the next big step
you'll see in space. Beyond that, with that space
station, we'll be going back to the moon, building
a colony so that we can stay there and explore it for
longer periods of time. We'll eventually go to
Mars and beyond. But those kinds of things, in my
mind, are... They will happen, but it's
impossible to say when. People in these United
States tend to be reactioners. I guess we'll have
to wait until somebody does something to prod us
into making us want to do that. I'll see you in May.
What do you see as the legacy of space? Well, I'm not
sure it's ready to have left a legacy yet. I think
it's more like still a dream. We've only scratched
the surface of what can be done in space. Since the
first Sputnik was up and Yuri Gagarin and Al
Shepard made their flights, we've come a long
ways. I was back in college when that happened,
about your age. And the things that have happened
in that what to me seems like a fairly short span of
time, are fairly fantastic. But we're still just
kind of learning how to crawl. We're not up and
running yet. Do you feel that all the money we spent
on the space programs and the various different
programs within could have been better spent
elsewhere? Well, there's always going to be
speculation about hindsight. Could I have done
this better? Could I have done that better? I think
perhaps, especially back in the Apollo days, we
could have been more efficient with them that way
we were spending our money. We had as a goal to go to
the moon in the 60s, and we used money to help solve a
lot of problems, to get over hurdles that we could
have probably solved more efficiently with less
funds if we had elected to spread out the time it
would take. We have, since that time, with the
shuttle, we have started to work in a way that is a
lot more efficient and giving the taxpayer, I
feel, more product for his money. The returns on
going into space are multifold, and people have
talked about spinoffs and all that kind of stuff,
what it's done for medicine computers, and you can
get spiels and see books written on the subject.
Those monies, I think it's also important to note
that They weren't just burned up in the flames of
the rocket as it shot off. Those go into the
American workers' pockets as wages, and so it is
not necessarily a welfare program, but it
certainly stimulates the economy in a certain
way, and it gives us a positive, tangible kind of
a... return on doing it. So I think one of the things
that I learned after our flight that there was also
maybe an even more important product of the
flight, and that is the American people really
need something that they can grab hold of and say,
we did that and I'm proud of it. They certainly felt
that way about the space shuttle. I think they
still do. And all of those things, to me, add up as
far as the government spending. I don't think for
the amount of money that we're spending on the
space program, you could have gotten very much
good out of those monies invested in other places.
People use the term, I forget the exact specifics,
but... health, education, welfare kind of
things, agencies, they go through NASA's, the
same amount of NASA's total year budget, they go
through that in like a week. And you could have
given them another week's budget, and the good
that they would have been able to do with it is very
small compared to what I think we've been able to
produce. So you feel the space programs helped
unify the Americans? It certainly did right
after, I know it did when we went to the moon. It
did... with the first flight of the shuttle. And
maybe we were needing something. We'd had a lot of
things with the hostages and Iran. few things like
that that went on that we were getting to wonder if
we were still the great country that we are. At
least a lot of people were, and the flight really
did help solidify at least some patriotism and
national pride again. And that'll come up. We'll
do something else down the road that they'll show
the same amount of pride in. How, in your opinion,
did the war in Vietnam affect the space program and
vice versa? It tended to... divert attention and
funds away from it primarily because our national
goals were oriented elsewhere. And I think that's
natural when you're involved in a conflict.
That's where our money should be going to try to
resolve that. The space program survived all that
and came out maybe the better for it because that
was part of the role I was talking about earlier. We
learned as an agency here at NASA to work much more
efficiently and not tend to go solve all of our
problems with pouring more dollars into them, but
sell them otherwise. Being
in orbit in space, if you will, In looking back, you
can see the Earth and you see the space. How does
this expanse of space affect you? It's kind of
mind-boggling at first, the fact that you can see
as much with just a glance as compared to what we're
normally used to. It certainly gives one a feeling
of... a newness, a unique environment that you're
working in. Space is really a black place. Boy, I'm
telling you, if you're not night adapted, when you
look out into the black, that is about as black as
anything could be. But it's also a beautiful
sight, looking at the Earth from that altitude, or
the kind of altitude we're talking about, the low
Earth orbit, which we were about 170 statute miles
up. And the speed, you know, you go around the Earth
once every hour and a half, so you know you're
really moving on. But... But you're just floating
around while you're doing it. So I don't know of
anything to liken it to. But it is really a
pleasurable kind of a treat to enjoy. Do you
feel space will become commercial? Oh, yes, in
fact, it already has. Of the satellites that the
space shuttle is carrying, about a third of them
are commercial satellites, primarily in the
areas of communications, but communications,
weather, and that sort of thing are utilizing
space extensively and have been, you know, when
you tune in to the evening news and you see the...
The weather shot, what all the weather is, part of
that is from commercial satellites. You can sit
down and you can watch a sports event that's going
on in Europe or a news event that's taking place in
South America or something. Most of those are all
due to commercial satellites. We're also going to
learn to do things like make new products up there
that you can't make as well down here on Earth due to
gravity. We experimented a little bit with one on
this flight. It's a process called
electrophoresis, which is used to generate
certain kinds of pharmaceuticals. And the next
flight will also have sort of a small factory for
doing that that some commercial enterprises are
interested in.
Personally, is it worth it? Oh, yeah. The
investment of the time that I personally put into
it, absolutely.
Well, I actually was associated with the space
program that the Department of Defense was doing
as early as 1966. I was supposed to have flown on
that, and it got canceled, and I was transferred
here to NASA in 69. And it was 81 before I got to fly,
but had a great deal of fun in the meantime. I
enjoyed every minute of it and thought I was able to
contribute something rather positive to the
flights that we did throughout the 70s. The treat
of actually getting to fly was well worth it, and I
hope to do it six, eight, ten more times if they'll
let me. And for the country? Oh, absolutely. Well,
I've gone into several of the regions for the
country that I thought that it was productive, but
to me... If a country is going to maintain its
greatness like this one has, it needs to push the
frontiers of technology. And the space program
has given us an excellent way of doing that. You
can't just sit back and write on your laurels.
You've got to keep pushing and looking for new
things and exploiting different kinds of science
that we haven't utilized before. If you don't,
we're going to be left behind. And I think the space
program has given us a good forum for doing that.
What do you personally think of the men who've used
their space careers as stepping stones to
political ends? All the more power to them. You
know, people get through the space program and
have left it for various reasons, quite a few of
them because the flights were so far in between.
And... As I said earlier, we've got people of all
kinds of personalities and what have you, and some
of them are very... It would seem the natural thing
for them to do to get into politics. I think the fact
that they were astronauts maybe is that gave them a
little bit of push that I don't see anything wrong
with that. Most people that get into politics,
they'll use anything in their background that's a
plus to help them. I don't think... The fact that
they were astronauts really made them better
politicians or better in government, but I
believe it did probably widen their background a
little bit.
All right. Okay.